Do you recall your feelings when you first went to a Yale practice or a Bonfire or a Muster or a Silver Taps?
Not a great deal.
One thing that did impress me, I guess, is during what they then called orientation.
We went over to the MSC, to one of those larger rooms, and various people were being introduced.
And whoever was conducting, and I don't remember who, introduced the corps commander as a typical cadet.
And I said, that would hardly wash.
He would not be corps commander if he was the typical cadet.
I guess because of my own background, I fit in very easily to the corps concept, to the military concept, to the head concept as far as departments.
My own personal proclivities, probably from the president to the dean to the department head, I don't really have that much problem with a tight organization.
Some people think it's the end of the world.
And my own personal view is A&M has not done as well on its hiring since we went to the committee system.
in the uh in 59 and their 60s uh dr nance was a department head frank hubert was the dean uh earl rutter was the president what do you what did you and your colleagues uh think about those you've already mentioned nance what'd you all think about most people appreciated frank and rudder
To a degree, I think they appreciated the fact that he was probably in the right place at the right time as far as both racial integration is concerned and the mission of leaving.
I think his own personality, prestige helped on that.
Sometime we got a lot bothered with his highway six rooms, north and south.
I've never been a person who cares much about people with beards and mustaches.
his view on shaving them off short of balmy.
Not as much as Mark Clark, President of the Citadel, saying that if you don't put flowers in your firebox, I'll have a university gardener do it for you.
Or don't be downtown Charleston coffee shop criticizing my policies.
Earl was nothing at all like that.
I remember one day at a meeting, I think it was over at whatever, the Sunday Holidays in Biological Sciences.
Let me back up a bit.
Though I never pushed this hard, nor was I in a position to push this hard, I've always thought that A&M missed an opportunity in the community to be
a better server of the community as far as after hours education is concerned i don't think we've ever stepped up to that plate
At one time there was somebody and I asked Mr. Rutter if he had any thought of giving it to that and he didn't give me much of an answer.
Later in the 80s, when he was Director of Academic Service, I went up to Indianapolis University there to look at their extended education program where they had a lot of work on nights and weekends.
set up with the local equivalent to Polish to use their training rooms because people couldn't park in the parking lot and profs teaching two regular courses in one course on the weekend or evening or whatever and I came back and made my report and I never get any support from the higher administration on that
This is part of my soapbox, and I've done so much about it in years.
I still don't think that we serve the local community.
If a department wants to offer courses, they can.
But my argument then and now would be until the administration decides
that we're going to create an evening division about whatever name for the dean in charge with support is not going to happen.
Because education probably still offers more evening courses than anybody else, but a weekend course, a Saturday course.
But back to your question, I always had a good relation with Dean Hubert.
I remember one time,
After we got all our divorces and it was a college of liberal arts and he was dean of education, business was separated out against John Pearson as dean.
Was he the first dean?
Yeah.
And we were without a dean for whatever reason.
And I mentioned that to you where you said, oh, you know, don't be in too big of a hurry, you might get something you don't want.
And we got several that we didn't want.
But to answer your question, I really don't think in the 50s and 60s that many faculty were that much concerned about the higher administration.
I just never did sense they were concerned with their department head and their dean, especially at budget promotion time.
But once you got beyond that, I don't think they got up in arms whether
We had this person or that person or while Morgan left or whatever it may have been.
In the early 60s, as the committees are appointed to look to the future as to what A&M ought to aspire to be, aspirations report, what do you think was your personal and those of your acquaintances, what was the reaction to the proposals about coeducation and all the other changes?
to my own person and most of my colleagues.
I didn't know anyone who did not support the co-ed.
If it is, I missed it.
I missed it completely.
I know in classes when we would talk about it, and the students would ask what I thought about it, and I'd say, I think we all have it, and so on.
Well, nothing but the mooses would come, and that's when I learned about the moose spot.
And I guess you've heard about the moose spot.
Describe it, though.
Well, this is what it's described to me in a core outfit.
And this is before women, or at least many women.
And girls would come in from TWU, UT, wherever, snook, old dime box, wherever.
And in each outfit, there was a tin can.
And everybody put their nickels, dimes, and quarters, maybe even bills in it.
And then after the weekend, there'd be a vote among the guys in the outfit as to who had the ugliest blind date.
And that person got the moose pot.
And that's what I was told by the students.
I was not an Aggie.
I did not participate.
But they would say in class discussion, nothing but the mooses would come.
And I really would like to see some of those guys come back and see how attractive Clarkville Edge would stack up with anybody, any place.
Do you remember any student or anyone else making an argument or anything against these changes?
Some of the students.
Yeah.
But I don't remember any petitions or any rallies.
I guess what surprised me, there was less opposition
to racial integration than to sex integration.
Right.
Do you remember any event, negative event, in any fashion about racial integration?
No, I do remember.
Personally, as you know it,
I had that new reserve unit in a middle hall in my office in the surrounding classrooms.
And I remember looking at my desk one day and here was a black sailor at my door.
He was a transfer student who had been in a reserve outfit in college elsewhere, transferred to A&M.
He heard there was a reserve unit there in Navy uniform willing to join.
And I looked up, I don't know if the shop showed on my face, and I should remember his name, I don't, but he was one of the early black students that was admitted.
But I didn't see much in the classroom, I didn't feel any antagonism towards the blacks.
I've heard of women,
with some of the first classes saying they'd walk by and a guy would beat you in the leg or in the rear.
I never viewed it in my class and no female ever reported that to me that it happened.
But certainly I don't remember anything about that.
And there are those who argue that through the years we probably had someone from somewhere in South America, Puerto Rico, but who was from Puerto Rico or wherever where probably had as much
African blood as anyone, but no one ever said anything about it.
But as far as this true integration, I was really proud and surprised that there was, I don't know of any demonstration or petition that says much more controversy over the initial reading of that.
If there had been a secret ballot in the history department regarding coeducation,
making the Corps voluntary, and racial integration, what do you think the vote would have been?
Do you think there would have been a few who had voted against it?
I don't remember hearing any.
Did you feel that you and your colleagues began to feel during the 60s that A&M was making progress?
Making progress in expanding programs, yes.
There are those who argue that maybe it's true that in the absence of racial integration and co-eds, there would still be 5,000 or 6,000 students.
I don't know whether that's true or not.
I don't think we'd be where we are today, but I don't know actually how much growth would have taken place.
You know, maybe I was just to go longer, but I never thought in that sense, but I don't remember many of my colleagues out beating on drums to do this or do that or increase the programs or if someone proposed it, we said yes it's a good idea or bad idea, which really is that move to go on.
I guess a term that later brought me more is world class, but I don't know what that means.
I guess it means something to never use the phrase.
But I think within the context of what this institution was and is, that it's made a remarkable growth, a remarkable adjustment to the changes.
Many of the things we missed, we had a few streakers.
And I don't know of any great movement on the part of any faculty to move into what some consider to be the academic university
mainstream of the 60s.
Maybe we were so enduring, we were so, quote, conservative, we just didn't think in those terms.
But I knew we had something going with our remarkable growth.
in the 70s and 80s.
As you well know, too fast a growth for the facilities that we had and the resources that we had.
Let's see, anecdotes.
See if you can remember and share with this machine any anecdotes about Aggie
good bull and or unique excuses that students may have tried to give you for, or pranks they tried to play in class or anywhere else?
Well, don't know much about pranks in class.
I didn't see them.
You used the word excuse.
I found that the A student cheating one time.
The crib was obviously there.
So I asked the class I called him up.
He said, well, I always did it in high school.
I said, well, I don't care what you did in high school.
You don't do it here.
Now, whether, you know, he was just saying there for one, something better to say.
What about excuses for absence?
Most of them are pretty standard, like a sick relative or that or just had to go.
Now I can relate something not directly related to my class, but as director of academic services where I had about 1,800-2,000 German studies students, I heard some very
None of us are unique, perhaps unusual.
I had this father's son in the office.
I dropped the ball and the daddy was indignant I mistreated his son because he did this, this, and this.
And so we got to talking about what I had done and what the boy had done.
Well he had a broken leg and was on crutches and so and so.
So I first assumed it was the tail end semester and he missed finals.
But as the conversation got around, it happened in the very first days of class.
And I said well, and the boys said I couldn't get to class.
And I would say, well, you didn't have friends you could have to get there.
You didn't know anyone you could have to get there.
And you didn't have crutches or whatever.
But then as the conversation went on and on, the glare from the father turned from me
to the boy.
By the time we were through, he almost took him by the ear and broke him out and apologized to me because his son had painted this picture of that mean old guy.
He just kicked me out.
The second one, not quite the same, I heard a student, this is the first floor of Harrington, the exterior's closed in, and these partitions around, no rail walls, no rail doors.
I heard this wailing and moaning.
Ned Guthrie, who was my associate director, called and said, Garland, can you help to this?
This girl came in and secular reported she walked in the front door, falling down on her hands and knees, just wailing the bottom.
So it finally got her calmed down and she couldn't believe that she had been dropped from university after her first semester because she had a .4.
I thought I had a semester to mess around.
I said, well, now, who told you that that you didn't?
I said, now, if you go somewhere, I don't care if we're going to bring you back 12, 15 hours, 18 days, I will consider it.
I read the letter, and she went on down the way.
That's not a prank.
I didn't see too many pranks in the way.
Did you ever?
I'm not sure that what she was saying was an excuse.
She was just trying to
I assume they had a semester to mess around.
In all of your years at A&M, as a faculty member and then as an advisor, did you ever have any effort by a parent from off campus, a truly outside administrator or a politician or a, quote, rich Aggie attempt to pressure you?
I had a few calls from Bob Cherry about representing the so-and-so son or congressman or state senator, so-and-so.
And what would be the nature of those?
I don't know whether you'd call it pressure or not.
He called inquirer about it.
And I would explain to him what I thought and what I knew about the student.
And he said, well, I'm just going to ask.
And then...
I do not remember the gentleman's name, but he was the president of Portland Students.
And I dropped his son and I called Randy and said, Randy, you may hear something about this, but we never did.
I had a board member's son.
and I never heard.
One board member's son, Ed Cooker, called me about and we agreed to meet.
We didn't meet.
Ross Weisenbaker.
And apparently they wanted me to move.
He got squared away and eventually I just agreed.
On occasion I had calls from the athletic department, but in all the years, I don't remember
any real pressure.
There would be inquiries about it.
I've heard other colleagues say that they felt they were pressured by them, but that may be a matter of definition.
But I would simply say whether as an administrator in academic services or as a problem, well here's the person's record and here's what we did.
Did any department head ever kind of call you on the carpet
about the grades that you had given out as being too much or too few of anything?
I don't remember ever.
And I assume that Dr. Nance may have shaken his head occasionally over some of what we may have done.
I think we all experienced this, the enormous differences in classes.
I remember very well one summer session I had two sections of 105 or 106.
and one in nearly all ACBs and one in all CCDs.
I mean, it's probably been a random assignment, though.
Oh, that leads me to a good one.
Compare the students who took summer classes at A&M in those first years, the makeup of your class in summer compared to the fall and spring.
In the early years, it would not be that much different.
In the later years, we had these provisional students that were needed.
But you had women in those first summers.
Oh, okay.
And weren't things more relaxed among the students?
Without the uniforms and...
Probably so.
I didn't, I guess I was more struck by the difference in the performance of one class compared to the other, but in theory they'd all been assigned to these classes roughly the same way.
They were not assigned on SAT or anything else.
But you're probably true, the summer classes were the mixed
Do you remember having any impression that Mr.
Rudder's health was declining not long before his death?
Not that I can remember any overt information.
Like I don't.
I don't know of any.
I had Annie in class while she was going.
I had her one summer.
And I would see her cage there, but she never said anything.
Of course, I'm not sure she knew.
Do you remember when or how you heard the news that he had died?
No, I remember where I was when Jarvis Miller was NASA's president.
I was in the MSC then.
Yeah, all right.
Well, we'll get to that one later.
Speaking about remembering, do you remember where you were when you heard the news that JFK had been shot?
I was just going to my class in Nagel.
I just walked in and someone came in.
And you and I were— Whatever that floor was.
all right and then we were going to go to lunch in the msc and i was saying hurry up let's and you were saying listen to the radio uh and uh we were all stunned uh all right then when dr williams came do you remember any reaction to him or any feeling what did you begin to see in him as a president huh
Of course, I didn't see him that much.
I would see him around.
I'd go to functions where he was.
But I would not have the close contact that you would.
Occasionally going down to either your office there or to John's or wherever, I would
which since I just recall, you know, how well he was welcomed and the fact that he was, you know, a first-rate person and administrator, but I don't have any feeling beyond this like a vague notion on that.
All right, in the department by that time there's a master's program.
Do you remember many history majors in your early years?
You ever know of one man named Lushani?
Do you remember that name?
Yeah.
He was one of our earlier masters.
I don't know who he worked for.
He's now the finance man for the experiment station.
How would that be spelled?
Do you know?
L-I-C-C-O-N. Oh, Lichoni.
Lichoni.
Yeah.
L-I-C-O-N-N-E or something like that?
In fact, he ought to be a guy.
Yeah, yeah.
He's hung around here.
Yeah.
When I get up I get the phone book.
I get it now, that's on my mind.
That's all right.
I got it written here.
I think it's David.
Yeah, I think it is David.
He went down to Gouchner for a while in some capacity.
He was brought back here to either the Experiment Station or Extinction Service and I think he's, I'd use the word chief fiscal person or somewhere in that category.
Okay and so under Williams, in the early 70s, did you and your colleagues think that we were making headway?
Well, we just thought, we all learned that the fact that you got a historian-administrator job doesn't mean a damn thing.
As far as people who say, man, you have him, you ought to get our, the dean is a historian.
I never saw any advantage, nor disadvantage, to having a person of a particular discipline.
All right, and David Maxwell was by this time the dean.
What about your perception of him?
Well it was mixed.
You know I finally finished my degree while I was here.
It got through all the promotions and he was a little hack that I came in late wanting to be promoted but he did it.
I'm trying to think of who.
Who did he go to a bar to try to rescue?
Some department head.
I don't, yeah.
Okay, Dr. Nance then retired, and he was replaced by, from Oklahoma, and moved up to Telluride.
Oh, boy.
I can remember the interview, when he was interviewed.
His friend was Shirley Black.
I tried to call him because he's up the road in Silverton.
How did the department change under his headship?
He wasn't much of a department head.
He got promoted to be associate dean.
So he was more of a chairman?
No, well that's when we were making this transition to a chair.
I guess I thought he was not very positive in his leadership.
a drifter.
Not that he was driven, but he just sort of let things, wasn't laid back, just sort of let things go, is my impression of him.
And was there a shift more to committees?
Yes, always through years, there's more.
I don't think you really like to make decisions.
All right.
During then, during the later 70s, 80s, well, until your retirement, there were a number of department heads.
I'm not going to ask the negative.
Who would you give the highest marks to among that group of department chairmen?
Okay.
See, in 79 I became director of academic services.
All right, describe that function.
Yeah, we'll get back.
Okay, okay.
For how many years, I don't know.
You may remember until 54 or 55, we had a basic division somewhere along in there.
It was after I came to England where all freshmen went into that.
Then for years, we had these undecided majors.
You ended up being in the College of Liberal Arts, not in the College of General Studies, too.
But in the summer of 79, Prescott, McCandless, and I guess Jarvis, is he president now?
Not 79, no.
Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Decided that it should be separate from any college.
because some of the colleges said, well, liberal arts is taming those people.
So academic service created that summer.
And in that was the general studies program, study abroad, provisional students.
I began that fall a new faculty orientation where we called, put them on the payroll.
First time we'd ever had that.
I was also the liaison with TU Galveston.
I went down there once a month to sit on their APC.
And our main, our main professor was a journal studies student.
And in theory you could be in there until you had 60 hours.
Some were 50, 30, but also
I was, I guess, the way I read it was sort of liberal.
I even had seniors transfer in who were in a major that they were unhappy with.
I understand later after I retired they became more restrictive.
But I looked at it as a place for those who did not know where they wanted to go or what they wanted to do.
Now, also, every time I talk to freshman parents, I said, do not be concerned that your student is in general studies major, because in this, they have a variety of opportunities they can move into.
And by the time we retired in 86, we had about 2,000 students in there.
Early on, I mentioned I always thought the university should have an evening program of whatever name.
I also think, and we talked about it, to have a separate, I won't use the word college, but
that would be an expanded general studies program.
Now, in competence, were the students in that program, were they similar to the rest of the?
The rest.
They were going to majors end up at three A's and four O's, the way as anybody else would.
In fact, one young man that we interviewed for a Rhodes Scholar as a C.E.U.
major, I believe had started out,
Now, you reported in that function, you reported to whom?
To the provost.
And y'all were located physically where?
And that was a full, you didn't teach at all?
Two courses, okay.